Hi everyone, thank you so much for being here. My name is Timothy Keyes and I'm a
data scientist at Stanford HealthCare. Because I work at a hospital, I actually
want to get started by asking you all to remember the last time you went to visit
your doctor. During your appointment, your doctor probably listened to your heart
as a part of their comprehensive medical exam. They probably also prescribed you
a medication or gave you a vaccine. At some point during your visit, they may
have ordered a laboratory test, like a blood test or an x-ray. And probably at
some point, someone asked you to update your insurance or billing information
for financial purposes. What you may not know is that at the end of your visit,
your physician actually wrote up a text document summarizing everything that you
did together that day and uploaded it into a data system called your
Electronic Health Record, or EHR. Your personal EHR is really important. It's
basically a story about your health, starting on the day you were born and
leading up to today, that is shared among all of the clinicians who are involved
in your care. This is useful because it means that the next time you go to see
one of your doctors, they can reference any of the changes that have happened to
your medical concerns so that they can offer you the highest quality, most
efficient care possible when they do see you for what brings you in that day. The
problem with the Electronic Health Record, though, is that over the course of
your entire life, it tends to look less like this and more like this. There are
thousands of pieces of information about you in your EHR. Every time you've ever
had your blood pressure taken, every time you've ever filled a prescription, every
time anyone has interacted with your insurance company, it's so much stuff. So
it's really hard for your clinician to find any information about you, even when
they're looking for it really hard. This is made even more difficult because, and I
was kind of shocked to learn this when I was in medical school, is that most of
this information is stored as unstructured text, making it all the more
difficult to search through and parse. This is why our team at Stanford
Healthcare created an application called Chat EHR or Chatter. Chatter provides a
chatbot interface for clinicians to ask natural language queries against a
patient's chart and to receive a text answer from an LLM that is hooked into
the EHR. Chatter's UI is served by an infrastructure layer that handles all
the technical things that you need when you're working with LLMs, and this
infrastructure layer is also exposed on the back end as a suite of REST APIs so
that data scientists like me can build various task-specific automations to
guide our patients efficiently through the healthcare system. Some of the things
that we tend to do with these task-specific automations are screen
patients for eligibility for certain kinds of appointments, schedule those
appointments, and then write draft documentation for our clinicians once
those appointments are completed. However, this talk is actually not about
Chatter at all. It is not about how it was built, and it is not about how it
works. Instead, it is about a single question that faced our team once we put
this system into production and over 4,000 of our clinicians started using it
out in the real world for real patient care, and that question is this. How do we
know that an LLM-powered system is behaving as expected over time, or more
specifically, how do we know that the text that the LLM is generating is
reliable, useful, and safe for our patients and the clinicians who serve
them? I can't tell you that our team or really anybody else has definitively
answered this question. It's a really, really hard question, but what I can do
is share with you three lessons that our organization has learned in our
journey trying to do so. Sound good? Awesome. This brings us then to lesson
number one, the view from space. I will claim that LLMs really aren't so
different from other statistical models in terms of what you really care about
organizationally once they have been deployed. What I mean by this is that our
organization has an MLOps framework that we use for all of our statistical model
deployments, and we were really worried when we started working with LLMs that
they were just too different of a technology, and they would basically
smash our framework into smithereens and we would have to start over from scratch.
Luckily, this didn't happen because we just found in practice that regardless
of the type of model that you're serving, whether it's logistic regression, XGBoost,
an LLM, or an agent, there's always certain things that you have to do to
support a model when it's in production that are kind of regardless of the
underlying technology. Let me illustrate this clearly by walking you through
Stanford HealthCare's MLOps framework. Your organization probably has something
pretty similar, but if you don't, Julia Silke actually gave a really beautiful
talk about MLOps in her PositConf talk a couple of years ago, and you should go
watch that. But at Stanford HealthCare, we break down MLOps into three pillars.
The first we call system integrity. This is about monitoring a model's ability to
find its input data and to post its output to the intended destination with low
latency and high availability. This has to do with the IT infrastructure supporting
your model, so regardless of what that model is, it's always on the table and
it's something you have to keep track of. The second pillar we call performance.
This is about monitoring the quality and accuracy of the output of the model.
So how often is the model correct? How often is it incorrect about the things
that it does or says? Again, regardless of the model, this is something you have to
care about if you want to be a good data scientist. And then lastly, our third
pillar is impact. Because we're a hospital, it's really not enough for our
models to be technically excellent. They also have to have a traceable way of
serving our number one goal as an organization, which is providing the best
patient care possible. So we typically also monitor process measures and KPIs
that are associated with any of our deployments to make sure that they are
serving their intended purpose towards this mission. So we found that these three
principles, kind of luckily for us, are sufficient for monitoring any model after
it's been deployed, including LLMs. But that all being said, we did find it most
difficult to tackle this second pillar. How do you define and then monitor the
accuracy of an LLM? It's a really sophisticated technology, and it can do
so many things. This brings us to our second lesson. So we are now no longer in
space. We have re-entered the atmosphere. And as we get closer to the Earth, we can
appreciate that despite their apparent differences at a high level, there are
some key differences between LLMs and other kinds of statistical models that
affect how we define and monitor their performance, just like accuracy element.
There are a bunch of differences that we could pull apart here between LLMs and
other types of models, but I will talk about three key differences that we are
most opinionated about at Stanford. The first is this. Humans simply interact
with text differently than they do with the outputs from other kinds of models,
like probabilities or discrete labels. In a clinical environment, machine learning
models are typically used to make recommendations to clinicians. So they
might recommend prescribing a particular medication or ordering a
certain laboratory test. But in practice, what we found is that unless these
models are highly, highly accurate, which most of them simply are not, because
medicine is very hard, clinicians learn not to trust them, and so they ignore
them. So they end up being not so useful. With LLMs, on the other hand, we find
that this kind of like magical human-computer interaction dynamic
emerges where clinicians are actually really eager to read the free text
recommendation of an LLM and to understand its justification for making
that recommendation. They kind of like see what the LLM is suggesting to them,
run it through their own clinical reasoning process, and then decide if
they agree or disagree with the model. So what we've learned is that monitoring
the so-called performance of our LLM deployments is really about capturing
this human-in-the-loop adjudication process, so that we can track over time
how much our expert clinicians are agreeing with the things that the LLM
says. I think this is well illustrated by an example, so I'll walk you through one
of our LLM deployments to give you a flavor for how this looks in practice.
The task here is we're asking the LLM to identify patients who might benefit from
an appointment with a specialist, just a certain kind of physician, basically. So
our starting point is a prompt, and that prompt contains the criteria for the
specialist appointment. It usually contains some information about the
types of illnesses that the specialist can treat. We send this to the LLM along
with clinical notes describing the health of the patient and ask the LLM to
output two things. The first is a targeted recommendation for whether the
patient should get the specialist appointment, and the second is a
justification with cited evidence from the patient's chart of why it made that
recommendation. Both of these are then sent to one of our expert clinicians who
are always in the loop, and that clinician then decides if they agree or
disagree with the model and if they want to place the referral for the
specialist appointment. Our monitoring approach then really hinges on capturing
this clinician's decision within our electronic health record, and then we
track it over time so that if we see basically that the disagreement rate of
our clinicians is increasing for a deployment after some period of
time, this basically suggests that something is going wrong, maybe
documentation practices have changed, maybe we need to adjust the prompt, and
that our data science team then needs to remediate that. Okay, so moving on to our
second key difference between LLMs and other statistical models in terms of
monitoring performance. Whereas the first one was more conceptual, this one is more
technical. It has to do with like some engineering things, and it's based on the
observation that frontier LLMs developed by large companies like ChachiPT,
Claude, and Gemini are externally developed and versioned by third parties.
So this means that they actually update and deprecate over time without your
team necessarily being in control. This is in contrast to something like an XGBoost
model that you may have trained, hosted, and served yourself, which will
only ever be updated or retrained or deprecated, turned off, when you choose.
You may not think about this as being related to monitoring a model
post-deployment in the traditional sense, but my point here is that when you're
working with proprietary LLMs, you don't just have to worry about the data
distributions of your deployed population shifting over time, you don't
just have to worry about the user behavior changing over time, you
actually also have to worry about the model itself changing over time as it's
continually updated by the third party that has developed it. So what we do
about this is basically host a suite of internally developed benchmarks that
help us to monitor task performance for important tasks at Stanford Healthcare
whenever a new model is released. So for those of you who might be familiar, GPT-5
was released a couple of weeks ago, and we were curious like, should we
switch to this model? We're using a couple of legacy models that won't be
supported in a couple of months, and so this is our approach for dealing with
that scenario. For those of you keeping me honest, I have used some jargon here.
So benchmark is a term that is used commonly in the LLM world, and the LLM
world like really likes jargon, but to keep it short and sweet, a benchmark is
essentially a human-labeled gold-standard test data set for a
specific task. So if you remember our specialty referral example from before,
the way that you would generate a benchmark for that is basically taking
your prompts and your clinical notes about a patient, showing them directly to
a clinician, and then asking, would you place the referral to the specialist for
this patient, yes or no? If you do that for a hundred patients, you've now
generated a data set that the model never saw during training because it
lives within your walled garden of your databasing of your organization, and
then you can then use that benchmark to evaluate many different LLMs on that
task, whether they already exist or if they are released in the future. So what
we've done in our organization is to basically do this for many different
tasks that we have identified as high-value, and then bundled them all
together in a custom Python evaluation harness called Medhelm, or medical
holistic evaluation of language models, that is actually quite similar under the
hood to some of the other evaluation frameworks that have been discussed in
this session. And in fact, we may end up porting it over to something like
Inspect in the future. All right, finally, this brings us to our third key
difference between monitoring LLM performance and monitoring the
performance of other kinds of statistical models, and this one is the
hardest. At the end of the day, no matter how big or expansive your
suite of benchmarks is, you just can't evaluate an LLM on every single task
that you could potentially apply it to within your organization. It's not
possible, and even if it were, it'd be prohibitively expensive to do. This
is because LLM outputs are just so much more flexible and expressive than other
kinds of models that are trained for one or a small number of specific purposes.
They can take pretty much anything as input, and they can produce pretty
much anything as output. So what do you do? Our approach is to identify important
and known failure modes across many of your different LLM deployments and try
to focus on those. So you basically identify things that you don't want the
LLM to do, and you monitor those specifically. This is helpful not just
for monitoring purposes, but it also is kind of a step into a process called
guardrailing your model, which basically means trying to intercept those failure
modes before they occur. So for example, at our organization, something that we're
really worried about is this issue of LLM hallucinations. Probably many of you
who work with LLMs are concerned about these as well. In our context, an LLM
hallucination just means that the model makes a claim about a patient that is
not substantiated or supported by any of the information present in that
patient's chart. So what we do to monitor this is basically we run automated
quarto reports that basically conduct a Python analysis using an algorithm
called fact decomposition, and this estimates the hallucination rate across
our chatter deployments for us. So how does fact decomposition work? Bear with
me, it's like an algorithmic talk. You start with the output text
that an LLM generates, and then you use either natural language processing or
another LLM to break it into the individual claims that it contains. So
for example, if the claim or if the output from the LLM says this patient
came to the neurology clinic to have their headache evaluated, the individual
claims would be that the patient has a headache and that they went to the
neurology clinic, and maybe also a third one that's like that their evaluation of
the neurology clinic was about their headache. Once you have these individual
claims, you can then use a powerful reasoning model or a smaller fine-tuned
language model to cross-reference all of the individual claims with all of the
clinical notes within the relevant time period of that patient's chart.
This basically allows you then to flag individual claims that are not supported
by any of the evidence present in the patient's record, and using simple
division you can then compute, like estimate a rate at which like how many
claims or what proportion of claims are supported versus not supported. So as an
example, this is a plot that I pulled or that I made in plot 9 that I pulled
from our most recent partial report that ran for the month of August, and
basically what we're doing is we're estimating the hallucination rates
across our different deployments among three of the different models that we
route to within the chatter infrastructure. What you can see is that
one of the models that is becoming a bit dated at this point, GPT-40 mini, was
hallucinating at a much much higher rate than the other models that we were using,
so this resulted in the recommendation basically to deprecate that model and
switch to one that was more reliable. Okay, so I would now like to conclude
with our third and final lesson, the kind of boots-on-the-ground view. When I talk
to other data scientists about the fact that I mostly work with LLMs now, a
common, like a common worry that I hear is like, oh I'm really intimidated by LLMs.
I haven't worked with LLMs before and I'm not sure where to get started, but I
feel like the craze has kind of swept over everybody else, but it forgot me. So
if there's one thing I would like for you to take away from this talk, it's
just that as a data scientist, regardless of if you've worked with LLMs before in
the past, you already have all the tools you need to work with LLMs if you would
if you would like. For example, during this talk we've met several components
of monitoring a deployed LLM system that may have seemed kind of new, but that
really connect quite deeply to things that you already understand as someone
that works with statistical systems. For example, we talked about benchmarking,
which just basically is another word for creating a test set for a model that you
didn't train. You know how to create a test set that's free from bias, that is
representative of your deployment population, that the model has not seen
before during training, like none of that is actually new. Secondly, we talked about
identifying failure modes for a deployment so that you can either
monitor them specifically or set up guardrails around them. And how do you
identify these failure modes? Well, it's simple. You spend some time with the logs
for the tool that you've deployed, do some exploratory data analysis on them,
and then you work with your governance partners to identify like what are the
problems we really want to avoid here. EDA and governance are foundational in
every single data science workflow, so that's not new either. And then finally
there's this question kind of underlying this entire conversation, which is what
are the tools that I should use to build with LLMs? Unfortunately I can't
give you a single answer for that. Here are a bunch of the frameworks that I
have used either in the past or currently. There are many of them, but if
you allow me to give a single recommendation for someone
who is completely new, I would suggest getting started with the packages that
Posit has developed for building with LLMs. If you work in Python, this is a
package called chatless. If you work in R, this is a package called Elmer. I think
what sets these packages apart is just that their docs are so excellent. They
will teach you everything that you need to know along the way, assuming basically
no prior knowledge, which is really helpful when you're a beginner. And if
even that is intimidating, which it very well might be, it certainly was for me
when I got started, I'll also just leave you with the reminder that there was a
time when the frameworks that we all use every day were new. Dplyr was once new.
ggplot was once new. Pandas and pullers were once new to us, but if you believe
in code-first data science, these are skills that you can pick up to help you
solve problems. So there's no reason to be intimidated. With that, I will thank
you all for being here and invite any questions.
Thank you, Timothy. We have time for one question and then lunch. And then lunch,
yeah. Human-in-the-loop accuracy measurement is expensive. How do you do
this at scale? Yeah, human-in-the-loop is expensive. I mean, you're kind of
preaching to the choir here because our experts are also clinicians. Like, can you
imagine the hourly rate for hiring a clinician as a consultant to do
labeling? Like, whatever number you're thinking of, it's too low. But I
think the cool thing for us as a health system is we're kind of uniquely
positioned because all of our users are clinicians, and so if we're giving them
the tools, we can kind of require them to give us feedback in return. How to do
this at scale in the general sense, like how to do scale AI for doctors or
something, I'm not sure. But at least in the medical context, I know that, like, we
always imagine our deployments as having a human-in-the-loop. We're not doing
things fully automated, so it's kind of baked into some of the workflows of the
tools we're developing. Sorry for the non-answer, but it's a really hard
question. Thank you. Let's thank Timothy and all our speakers again.